The term “data product” was originally coined in the seminal work of Zhamak Dehghani in 2019[1], where she presented the data mesh paradigm, and, as a key aspect, applied the product thinking to datasets, to make them easily discoverable, addressable, trustworthy, interoperable and secure.

Since then, the concept of a data product has been embraced by many organisations to streamline data reuse across various use cases, reducing costs and saving time. According to the Gartner Hype Cycle for Data Management in 2024, data products appear to be still on the rise but close to the peak of expectations. Additionally, “inquiries for the term data product have more than doubled in 2023 compared to 2022”, and “1 in 2 organisations studied have already deployed data products”[2], showing a clear interest of the industry.

While there is no agreed-upon definition of data product, the concept of packaging datasets along with all the relevant elements identified by an organisation to facilitate their discovery, exchange, and consumption by others clearly supports data sharing and transactions. As an example, CEN proposes data product as a key element in Trusted Data Transactions[3], defined therein as “standardised data unit packaging data and relevant conditions into a useable form”. This is why the data product concept has also been adopted by designers and implementers of data spaces, the instruments identified by the European Commission in their “Data Strategy”[4] to break data silos in Europe and foster cross-sector and cross-country data sharing in a trusted and efficient way.

Nowadays, the primary application of data has moved from traditional data analytics to increasing sophisticated AI workflows. These impose unique demands on data, including specific descriptions, new data quality dimensions and metrics, and tools to facilitate risk assessment in compliance with standards or regulations like the AI Act. The traditional concept of a data product (focused on packaging and sharing datasets for general use) must then evolve towards supporting specialised requirements of AI, a new paradigm that in BDVA we refer to as “AI-ready Data Products”.

